---
layout: post
title:  ""
date:   2016-09-30 05:00:00
tags: training women
author: Megan
---

Tool Feedback Trainings (TFTs) have been unique from the get-go -- identifying and bringing a UX designer, developer and digital security trainer together to co-facilitate and run joint sessions to better understand how users interact with particular tools in parallel with training, has been challenging on its own to say the least. But the USABLE team enjoys a challenge and we went one step further. In the spring of this year, the team decided to go a step further and recruit an all-women facilitation group to work alongside the all-women participants invited to the workshop. 
This would have been challenging under normal circumstances, but the criteria for the developers attending TFTs has made 

## Some challenges ...
Through this experience the team encountered many challenges. However, identifying a developer from a tool relevant to the community based on the interviews with both security and regional experts, as well as taking into account the pre-training survey of participants needs, who could also travel to the location of the training, during the dates of the workshop --- and oh, also happens to be a woman. The difficulties the team experienced in organizing the training speak to a larger issue in both the developer and training communities and that is there are not a lot of Arabic-speaking, regional experts who are women. They exist, but we need more! On top of this, there are some really rad women who are also security conscious software developers, but we need more of them too!

## Moving forward and leveraging experiences 		 	 	
Building off of the learnings and momentum from this training, the team has put together a few recommendations we hope other implementers will support and build into their program design or future program design.
Implement more women-led trainings!

More women-led and focused trainings are critical to enhancing and increasing the security of these communities and this can be applied across a variety of different groups who have historically been marginalized. The team received an overwhelming amount of positive feedback from not only the participants, but also the facilitators.

It also broke down stereotypes regarding women in technology and security, as traditionally this has been dominated by men. One of the first things one of the women mentioned in the workshop was that the facilitators did not 'look' like the stereotypical 'techy'. Women teaching women is an empowering atmosphere with the right group of people and future engagements that focus on this dynamic should be considered, especially when working with groups who have dealt with or are currently dealing with severe trauma, which can be hard to talk about in group settings and is impossible to talk about without building trust.

## Further recommendations and identifying gaps

*Training and trauma*
The training community needs stronger and more tested best practices when it comes to training on sensitive topics like security to groups who have experienced significant trauma. This is not a new concept, but we should move this up in the priority queue. 

*Specialized training for highest risk communities*
More specialized digital security training is needed for groups such as the one the USABLE team worked with. The group is on the extreme end of the spectrum in terms of risk. They have state actors from different governments, as well as non-state actors to worry about. All are very concerned about their safety when doing their work and most showed willingness to change their behavior. However, none knew anything about basic digital security best practices (anti-virus, encryption, using password managers). This is very alarming as they are certainly targeted because of the work they are doing in-region.
